GECCO 2026: Automated Design Competition
Scope
The competition concerns the development of an efficient algorithm to
optimize active 3D designs (i.e., simulated agents or robots). The
simulation environment is Framsticks, and participants have a Python
binding available to the native simulator library, so algorithms should
be implemented entirely in Python.
The goal of the competition is to propose an algorithm that will discover
agents whose center of gravity moves in the desired way in different
environments used during optimization. The properties of the desired
movement are defined by the fitness function (unknown to participants);
examples of such movements are: following a specific path in 3D,
swinging or jumping. The set of parameters that define each
environment (such as gravity, water level, terrain, and initial agent
rotation) is published, but their values will be set during the evaluation
phase. Each submitted algorithm will be tested to optimize agents in 10
different settings (environments and desired movements). These settings
will be the same for all participants.
The submitted search algorithm should represent solutions using f0 or f1
genetic encodings, or a new encoding that is based on them and
ultimately produces genotypes in these encodings. If needed, parameter
values and probabilities of mutation and crossover may be modified and
adjusted by participants.
Each submission must include a brief description of the algorithm and
standalone Python source code. The source code may utilize any freely
and publicly available libraries, but participants should ensure that they
provide instructions on how to install dependencies, allowing the
organizers to execute the submitted algorithm. The algorithm will not
have access to the Internet.

Judging
Algorithms submitted by the participants will be run in 10 different
settings (world configurations and desired movements), with each run
being repeated 20 times. During each run, the best fitness will be saved
and returned as the outcome of the algorithm. For each setting, this
fitness will be averaged over 20 runs, and then normalized taking into 
account the results of all submissions in this setting. The average of
normalized values obtained for each algorithm will constitute the final
score of the algorithm. The organizers will make every effort to obtain
fair fitness values by repeating optimization runs in case of potential
problems. Additionally, as a basic reference level, a baseline algorithm
(the winner from previous years) will be run using the same conditions
and constraints as the submitted entries.

In summary:
10 settings (world configurations and fitness functions)
20 repeated runs per setting, each run returns best fitness
These 20 best fitness values are averaged
The resulting average is normalized taking into account other
submissions
Average of 10 normalized values constitutes the final score of the
algorithm

The submitted algorithm with the highest final score that exceeded the
performance of the baseline will be considered the winner. In case the
best submitted algorithm performs worse than the baseline, this
algorithm will be considered the best submission, but no winner will be
announced. Summarized results of all submissions and the baseline will
be published in numerical and graphical form.

Algorithm evaluation
The simulation parameters that may be modified in each of the 10 world
configurations are: lifespan of a creature ("starting energy" and "idle
metabolism"), world size and heightfield (map), water level, gravity,
creature stabilization period settings, and creature body constraints
(minimal and maximal joint length).
The maximized fitness functions used in each of the 10 settings will
evaluate the similarity of the path of the center of gravity (COG) to some
desired path. This may be, for example, 1.0/RMSE of individual points in
3D, i.e., COG coordinates sampled in each simulation step, compared to
the desired straight line. Another example would be only considering the
vertical axis (z) of the COG trajectory and estimating how similar it is to
the desired function by calculating 1.0/(sum of
absolute differences).
Part of the world configuration consists of constraints on the complexity
of a feasible solution (for example, the number of genotype characters
not exceeding 3000, or the number of neural connections less than 30).
If a solution is evaluated that violates constraints of a given world
configuration, the returned fitness of such a solution may be either
decreased (the solution penalized, fitness less attractive, fitness
landscape depressed) or the returned fitness may be None, indicating an
invalid solution/genotype.

The algorithm will be stopped and will return the best fitness found so far
after (1) the number of function evaluation calls exceeds 100k, or (2) the
running time of one hour (excluding solution evaluation time) is
exceeded, or (3) the algorithm itself calls the function, or (4) a
Python exception stops the execution. The memory limit is 2 GB. The
submitted algorithm should be single-process, single-threaded, no GPU.
No more than one submission per participant is allowed.

How to start – installation
Let's prepare the Framsticks environment and the Python evolution
interface to work.
Download the Framsticks simulator – the most recent zip from
here and uncompress it in some directory. Note the directory
where the frams-objects.dll/.so/.dylib library is – the Python
scripts will need it.
Download "framspy" (Python interface to Framsticks) which is this
entire directory. It is best to download it using the svn client (
) or the git client ( ); the https certificate
encrypts but may not confirm the website's identity, so you may
encounter warnings.
Verify the interoperation of the Python code and the simulator –
make sure that this works without errors:
.
Install the DEAP framework in Python.
Copy all files from the downloaded "framspy" repository to
the directory in the uncompressed Framsticks distribution.
Edit and update the
path. Then, run this script and ensure
that evolution works. Converting this script for Linux is
straightforward.
The Python evolution interface ( ) is just an
example of an optimization algorithm. Participants should submit their
original search algorithms.
To test your algorithm in a setting very similar to the competition, use
. Read the contents of this file carefully and
make your algorithm use the class.
If you are new to the Framsticks simulator, parts 1–5 and 7 of the
tutorial provide a good introduction.
Contact support (at) framsticks.com if you encounter any problems or
require assistance.

Submission
It is recommended to contact the organizers and send a preliminary
version of the algorithm a week before the deadline to ensure no
surprises and unexpected problems with running the final version. To
ensure everything runs smoothly, test your algorithm in a clean
environment (no extra files/directories/dependencies), not in your
development environment.
Send the following to maciej.komosinski (at) cs.put.poznan.pl by the
deadline of 15 June 2026:
the sources of the algorithm zipped,
the user/team/algorithm name,
a concise description of the algorithm,
a specification on how to install and run it,
names of team members and their affiliations,
if you are interested in obtaining the GECCO certificate if classified
(results above baseline),
a consent to publish the names of team participants if classified
(for example, during the GECCO competition session),
a consent to publish or use the algorithm sources in future editions
of the competition.
Participants also have an option to describe their submitted algorithm in
a 2-page abstract/poster paper (the deadline for this submission is April
14/check the GECCO website). The paper will be reviewed and must be
submitted through the official linklings site.
